No Title Yet!
02 Sep 2025
From Unskilled to Skilled Level by
Implementing a system inspired by the human brain's 
conscious and subconscious minds
How can a humanoid have both of systems (conscious & sub conscious) at the same time? 
How can it plan a long-term goal while reacting to split-second changes in its 
environment?
How conscious effort becomes subconscious skill?
How it mirrors humans (The Dual-Process 
Theory of Human Cognition):
1. Conscious Learning: Our consciously think 
through each step of a new task (e.g., driving 
a car). This is slow and requires full attention.
2. Subconscious Execution: After practice, the 
task becomes automatic. We can drive while 
having a conversation. Our cerebellum 
handles the mechanics; our prefrontal cortex 
is freed up.
3. The Transformation: The repetition of 
successful trials gradually rewires our brain, 
transferring the skill from a conscious to a 
subconscious level.

Literature
Categories Date Source Title
Foundation Models & Generalist Policies May 2025
https://openhelix-
robot.github.io/
OpenHelix: A Short Survey, Empirical Analysis, and Open-Source Dual-System VLA Model for Robotic 
Manipulation
Foundation Models & Generalist Policies Mar 2025
https://arxiv.org/html/2503.
08338v1 Trinity: A Modular Humanoid Robot AI System
Foundation Models & Generalist Policies Mar 2025
https://developer.nvidia.co
m/isaac/gr00t GR00T N1: An Open Foundation Model for Generalist Humanoid Robots
Foundation Models & Generalist Policies Feb 2025
https://github.com/Physical
-Intelligence/openpi open π
Foundation Models & Generalist Policies Feb 2025 https://www.figure.ai/ai Helix: A generalist humanoid Vision-Language-Action model that reasons like a human
Foundation Models & Generalist Policies Sep 2024 https://openvla.github.io/ OpenVLA: An Open-Source Vision-Language-Action Model
Foundation Models & Generalist Policies May 2024
https://octo-
models.github.io/ Octo: An Open-Source Generalist Robot Policy
Foundation Models & Generalist Policies Dec 2023
https://github.com/kyegom
ez/RoboCAT RoboCat: A Self-Improving Generalist Agent for Robotic Manipulation
Foundation Models & Generalist Policies Jul 2023
https://robotics-
transformer2.github.io/ RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control
Foundation Models & Generalist Policies May 2023
https://code-as-
policies.github.io/ Code as Policies: Language Model Programs for Embodied Control
Foundation Models & Generalist Policies Dec 2022
https://robotics-
transformer1.github.io/ RT-1: Robotics Transformer for Real-World Control at Scale
Foundation Models & Generalist Policies Aug 2022 https://say-can.github.io/ Do AsICan, Not As I Say: Grounding Language in Robotic Affordances
Literature
Categories Date Source Title
Data & Benchmarks May 2025
Open X-Embodiment: 
Robotic Learning Datasets 
and RT-X Models Open X-Embodiment: Robotic Learning Datasets and RT-X Models
Data & Benchmarks May 2025
https://research.nvidia.com
/labs/gear/dreamgen/ DreamGen: Unlocking Generalization in Robot Learning through Video World Models
Data & Benchmarks Jun 2024
https://humanoid-
bench.github.io/ HumanoidBench: Simulated Humanoid Benchmark for Whole -Body Locomotion and Manipulation
Data & Benchmarks Jan 2023
https://microsoft.github.io/M
oCapAct/ MoCapAct: A Multi-Task Dataset for Simulated Humanoid Control
Data & Benchmarks Sep 2021 https://robomimic.github.io/ What Matters in Learning from Offline Human Demonstrations for Robot Manipulation
Data & Benchmarks Feb 2021
https://github.com/ubisoft/u
bisoft-laforge-animation-
dataset Robust Motion In-betweening
Literature
Categories Date Source Title
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures Jun 2025
https://www.physicalintellig
ence.company/research/re
al_time_chunking Real-Time Execution of Action Chunking Flow Policies
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures May 2025
https://www.physicalintellig
ence.company/research/kn
owledge_insulation Knowledge Insulating Vision-Language-Action Models: Train Fast, Run Fast, Generalize Better
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures Apr 2025
https://www.physicalintellig
ence.company/blog/pi05 π0.5: A Vision-Language-Action Model with Open-World Generalization
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures Feb 2025
https://www.pi.website/rese
arch/hirobot#robots-that-
talk-to-themselves Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision -Language-Action Models
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures Jan 2025
https://www.physicalintellig
ence.company/research/fas
t FAST: Efficient Action Tokenization for Vision-Language-Action Models
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures Oct 2024
https://arxiv.org/html/2410.
15549v1 A Dual Process VLA: Efficient Robotic Manipulation Leveraging VLM
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures Oct 2024
https://www.physicalintellig
ence.company/blog/pi0 π0: A Vision-Language-Action Flow Model for General Robot Control
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures Mar 2024 https://yay-robot.github.io/ Yell At Your Robot: Improving On-the-Fly from Language Corrections
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures Feb 2024 https://jlm-z.github.io/RSFT/Language-Conditioned Robotic Manipulation with Fast and Slow Thinking
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures Sep 2022
https://clvrai.github.io/skimo
/ Skill-based Model-based Reinforcement Learning
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures Oct 2021
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.0
1834 Thinking Fast and Slow in AI: the Role of Metacognition
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures Dec 2020
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.0
4181 Thinking Fast and Slow in AI
Cognitive & Hierarchical Control 
Architectures Jun 2020
https://openreview.net/pdf?i
d=iFQJmvUect9 Robots Thinking Fast and Slow: On Dual Process Theory and Metacognition in Embodied AI
Initial Proposed Architecture
Cognitive Architecture for Skill Learning
Subconscious System
Conscious System
Initial Proposed Architecture
Vision Sensor 
Camera Tokens LLM Text
?Robot
NNText
(Human Command)
Progress Update
Done:
• Initial System Architecture (conscious & sub conscious)
• Literature: Main Theory & Goal
• Simulation Environment Setup
Doing:
• Finalizing the specific models and data
• Defining the core scenario/task

No Title Yet!
09 Sep 2025
From Unskilled to Skilled Level by
Implementing a system inspired by the human brain's 
conscious and subconscious minds
How can a humanoid have both of systems (conscious & sub conscious) at the same time? 
How can it plan a long-term goal while reacting to split-second changes in its 
environment?
Transform Robot Actions from 
Conscious to Subconscious
Initial Title 
09 Sep 2025
Baseline
A standard LLM/VLM-Conscious system. This is a model like 
GR00T's VLM that:
• Takes in language commands and images.
• Reasons step-by-step to generate a plan.
• Executes actions slowly and carefully.
This represents the unskilled, novice state.
Goal
To achieve Subconscious execution. This is a model that:
• Takes in only sensory data (images, robot state).
• Is triggered by a context (e.g., seeing a specific object 
configuration).
• Outputs fast, smooth, reflexive actions without any internal 
reasoning.
This represents the skilled, expert state.
Conscious to Subconscious Transformer
Goal: building the learning process that allows a conscious action to become a subconscious 
habit.
1. Conscious Action: The VLM is given a task (e.g., "pick up cup"). It reasons, plans, and executes a slow, careful, 
and potentially jerky action. (During-Action Reasoning)
2. Practice & Repetition: This conscious action is performed repeatedly. Successful attempts are logged.
3. Transformation: The Transformer component takes these logged successful attempts and compiles them. It 
distills the successful motion into a robust, efficient "habit" or "reflex. “
4. Subconscious Assimilation: This new "habit" is installed into the Subconscious Model. Now, when the robot 
sees the cup, the subconscious system automatically triggers the smooth, fast "pick up" reflex without any 
involvement from the conscious VLM. (Post-Action Reflection).The Cerebellum would be a sub-component 
that takes the initial motor commands from the Subconscious Model and optimizes them for grace and 
precision before they are sent to the muscles (actuators).
5. Parallel Operation: The systems now work independently:
- The Subconscious System handles the perfected skill of "picking up the cup. "
- The Conscious System is free to do other things: reason about which cup to pick up, what to do with it, or 
even "think" about an unrelated task. The next time the robot is tasked with a similar action, the subconscious 
model takes over, leaving the VLM free to "think about other things" or plan a different task entirely.
Conscious vs. Subconscious in Humans
Conscious Processing ("System 2")
• What it is: Slow, deliberate, effortful reasoning (Kahneman’s “Thinking, Fast and Slow”).
• Inputs: Explicit goals (“I want to pour water”), sensory input (vision, proprioception), active 
attention.
• Processing: High cognitive load, step-by-step reasoning, feedback loops after each micro-
action.
• Outputs: Planned motor actions (sequence of joint movements, tool use).
• Speed: Slow (hundreds of ms to seconds per decision).
• Brain areas:
• Prefrontal cortex → planning, reasoning, decision-making.
• Cerebellum (posterior lobes) → error correction & fine adjustment during deliberate movements.
• Learning role: First exposure to new tasks (typing for the first time, driving lesson).
• Example:
• You pour water for the first time → thinking of grip, bottle angle, when to stop.
• Errors happen because you’re consciously monitoring each step.
Conscious vs. Subconscious in Humans
Subconscious Processing ("System 1")
• What it is: Automatic, fast, low-effort execution of well-practiced skills.
• Inputs: Minimal sensory trigger (just a glance at bottle & glass, no verbal command).
• Processing: Motor patterns retrieved from memory (“motor schemas”). Little/no explicit 
reasoning. Can run in parallel with unrelated thoughts.
• Outputs: Smooth continuous actions.
• Speed: Very fast (tens of ms).
• Brain areas:
• Cerebellum (anterior lobes & deep nuclei) → timing, coordination, motor memory.
• Basal ganglia → habit learning & action selection.
• Motor cortex → low-level execution.
• Learning role: After repetition, skills “compile” here (procedural memory).
• Example:
• Typing → you don’t think of each key; your fingers just do it while you think of dinner.
• Driving a familiar route → you arrive and barely remember the trip.
Conscious vs. Subconscious in Humans
Key Differences
Aspect Conscious (System 2) Subconscious (System 1)
Speed Slow (deliberate, stepwise) Fast, automatic
Effort High, attention-heavy Low, effortless
Error Handling Careful monitoring, frequent 
corrections
Smooth, with small slips 
ignored/corrected automatically
Input Explicit goals, reasoning, 
attention Minimal cue, past learning
Output Stepwise actions Fluid skill execution
Brain Areas Prefrontal cortex, cerebellum Cerebellum, basal ganglia, motor 
cortex
Example First time cooking a recipe Cooking it after 100 times
Conscious vs. Subconscious in Humans
Cerebellum’s Role
• Error correction (compares intended vs. actual movement).
• Motor learning (stores fine-grained timing of repeated actions).
• Execution speed control (makes subconscious motions smooth and 
fast).
• Cognitive cerebellum (recent studies: contributes to reasoning & 
language, but mostly timing/control).
• In terms of percentage:
• Subconscious controls ~95% of daily actions (walking, typing, 
eating).
• Conscious reasoning is reserved for novel, complex, or risky tasks.
The Transformation Process
• To build a framework that models the human transition from conscious, reasoned action to subconscious, automatic 
skill.
• To create a true subconscious action model that operates independently, without any direct instruction or goal embedding 
from a conscious system.
• Develop a framework for transforming robot actions from a conscious (LLM/VLM-driven, slow, deliberate) level to a 
subconscious (policy-driven, fast, automatic) level, inspired by cognitive science theories of skill acquisition.
1. Conscious Level (LLM/VLM-driven):
Slow, deliberate reasoning. Used for first-time, unskilled execution. In robotics → LLM/VLM generates action plans with 
feedback correction. VLM/LLM planner (e.g., GR00T’s frozen VLM) that can execute tasks slowly with feedback, generate first-
time demonstrations, and reflect on errors. It's the slow, careful process of thinking, planning, and making logical decisions 
about what to do. The conscious system has a slow feedback loop. It relies on high-level sensory input and reasoning to make 
corrections (e.g., "I moved too far, I need to adjust"). This is the learning loop.
2.Subconscious Level (Transformer/Diffusion Policy):
Fast, reflex-like execution. No explicit reasoning, goal tokens, or plans. Instead → direct mapping from perception + robot state 
to motor actions, learned from repeated practice. a goal-free diffusion transformer policy that takes only egocentric video + 
proprioception (+ tactile if available) and outputs actions at high rate; no text, no plans, no goal vectors at inference. It's the 
system that controls the how of the motion—its speed, smoothness, and fine-tuned accuracy. The subconscious system has 
an incredibly fast, internal feedback loop. It makes micro-adjustments without conscious thought (e.g., your hand instantly 
correcting for a small slip). This is the execution loop.
• Transformation Pipeline:
Data collected from conscious executions → stored → distilled into fast subconscious policies → added to a skill library. Over 
time → more tasks transfer to subconscious, just as humans do when learning. after the conscious loop succeeds the first 
times, trajectories are distilled offline into the subconscious policy; then future runs bypass the planner automatically.
Contributions
1. True Subconscious Action Model
• Build a dedicated subconscious policy layer (transformer/diffusion) that runs without reasoning or goal inputs.
• It executes from raw sensory streams (vision, proprioception) → action, mimicking reflex-level control.
2. Conscious → Subconscious Transformation Pipeline
• Show how data from deliberate conscious execution can be logged, distilled, and replayed until the policy achieves reflex-
level speed.
• Propose this as a general framework for skill transfer in humanoid robots.
3. Skill Recorder & Library
• Build an automated skill memory: successful tasks get saved as standalone policies.
• Future commands trigger a task recognizer that decides:
• If new task: conscious execution (LLM/VLM + feedback).
• If known task: subconscious policy execution.
4. Cognitive Science Mapping
• Explicitly frame your system as an engineering realization of dual-process theory (Kahneman’s “thinking fast and slow”), 
highlighting the transformation from conscious to subconscious.
• This makes it stand out as more than “just another VLA model. ”

No Title Yet!
16 Sep 2025
From Unskilled to Skilled Level by
Implementing a system inspired by the human brain's 
conscious and subconscious minds
How can a humanoid have both of systems (conscious & sub conscious) at the same time? 
How can it plan a long-term goal while reacting to split-second changes in its 
environment?
Progress Update
Done:
• Specific models and data
• Simulation Example Task Bassline Test 
Doing:
• Cognitive and Neurosciences Theories 
• Literature
• Finalizing the Implementation Plan
Foundation Model - NVIDIA Isaac GR00T
GR00T N1: An Open Foundation Model for Generalist Humanoid Robots (27 Mar 2025)
Simulation of a Fourier GR-1 humanoid robot performing 
a "pick and place" task
• Command : ['pick the pear from the 
counter and place it in the plate'
• So;
• Sys 2 (Eagle 2.5 VLM) = Goal Embedding
• Sys1 (Diffusion Transformer) =  Action
System Input Output
Sys 2 (conscious) Image Tokens + Text Tokens Goal Embedding (a tensor)
Sys 1 (subconscious) Goal Embedding + Current State Action Tensor (a tensor)
Dual-Process Theory “Thinking Fast and Slow”
• How can we make a robot that learns how to do X, and 
then does it efficiently, like a human does?
• Dual level expert systems: (Together these systems 
mimic the dual process theory by Daniel Kahneman 
combining high level planner with low-level rapid 
execution.)
• System 2 (“thinking slow“): Here, the VLM takes in vision and text as context, to make 
methodological decision about complex scenarios and intermediate tasks it sees. This guides the 
overall robot’s behavior as of their excellent understanding about the robot’s world. They acts as high 
level planner to achieve their main goals by dividing into multiple intermediate subtasks and 
reason over the multi-modal inputs and generate trajectories.
• System 1 (“thinking fast“): Then a transformer decoder or a diffusion model acts as an action 
expert for low level control and dexterous locomotion. We knew that diffusion models has rich 
image priors, the system leverages its superior semantic scene relationships which translates and 
executes the system 1’s guided path or instructions to perform agile and fine-grained motor actions.
Fitts & Posner model "The Three-Stage Model of 
Skill Acquisition"
• To achieve these goals, learners must use cognitive (Fitts & Posner, 1967) and verbal 
processes (Adams, 1971) to solve problems. 
• To this end, Fitts (1964; Fitts & Posner, 1967) suggests that motor skill acquisition follows 
three stages;
 1. Cognitive stage,
 2. Associative stage
 3. Autonomous stage
Fitts & Posner model "The Three-Stage Model of 
Skill Acquisition"
Three-stage process for how an unskilled task becomes a skilled, automatic one;
1. The Cognitive Stage (Conscious)
• In Humans: A novice must pay full, conscious attention to every step. They think about "what to do. " This is effortful, slow, and prone 
to error. For example, a beginner learning to drive thinks about every action: "Press the brake, turn the wheel, check the mirror. "
2. The Associative Stage (Practice)
• In Humans: With practice, the learner begins to associate specific movements with success. They make fewer errors and require 
less conscious thought. The movements become smoother.
3. The Autonomous Stage (Subconscious)
• In Humans: After extensive practice, the skill becomes automatic and subconscious. The person can perform the task without 
thinking about it and can focus their conscious attention elsewhere. A skilled driver can talk on the phone (hands-free!), listen to the 
radio, and navigate complex traffic without consciously thinking about steering or braking.
Generalist Robot Policies (GRP)
• A single, unified model capable of solving multiple downstream tasks 
or adapt to new tasks without task specific fine-tuning
• Unlike traditional policies which has to be trained for multiple subtasks 
or for specific platforms or hardware, a generalist policy as the name 
suggests the model develops emergent behaviors to generalize 
across unseen tasks, novel scenarios or even in any hardware 
setups
• For example, models like RT-2, π0 (Pi-Zero) and Gr00t N1. These GRP 
aren’t just stuck up with the pre-programmed or hard coded 
instructions rather self-explore and navigate through tasks or problems 
with intermediate goals with their “Observe Understand and Action” 
nature
Generalist Robot Policies (GRP)
1. RT-2 from Google
• Robotic Transformer (RT-2) is a closed source, novel vision language action model developed by Google Deepmind Robotics team. The model doesn’t 
just memorize-it understands the context and employs a chain of thought reasoning enabling it to adapt learned concepts to new s ituations.
• It comprises pretrained PaLI-X (55B) as vision model and PaLM-E (12B) embodied models as backbones, co-trained with vision data and upweighted 
robotics action data. It takes in a robot’s camera input (image) and an NLP query, and outputs discrete action tokens, which are then detokenized to 
generate code-based instructions that can control a robot similar to text responses from an LLM.
• The output is a sequence of action tokens as a string that describe the position and orientation of the robot’s end effector for manipulation, forming a 
closed loop control.
• It was found that the model learned emergent properties, solving novel tasks that the model wasn’t trained for such as human recognition, symbol 
understanding and reasoning. This level of generalization capabilities was the first of its kind all thanks to its training with web scale data. As the model 
directly executes actionable behavior, while getting rid of task-specific policies. 

Generalist Robot Policies (GRP)
2. Octo from UC Berkeley
• Octo (93M) is an open source transformer based generalist policy trained on 800,000 robot demonstrations from OpenX-
Embodiment Dataset and it performs on par with behemoth models like RT-2 (55B). All of the robotic data is taken, 
converted into a sequence of input tokens, and passed through the Octo transformer.
• At first the input instructions are passed as task tokens to the language encoder, along with a patched image passed to a 
CNN encoder as observation tokens. Then, the embeddings of the Octo transformer are decoded to output action tokens 
using a diffusion head. The authors report that, unlike discrete action tokens, diffusion based decoders works best.
• A unique attribute of Octo is its flexible and adaptable to different observation input such as wrist and third-person camera 
view.To adapt Octo to our robot configuration or action spaces, we will need to simply finetune it on a small demonstration 
dataset.
• Octo has three variants: Octo-Tiny, Octo-Small, Octo-Base (~93M)

Generalist Robot Policies (GRP)
3. OpenVLA from Stanford
• OpenVLA is a open source 7B parameter model trained on 970K episodes of Open X-Embodiment dataset for generalist robotic manipulation tasks. It 
consists of three main components:
1. Vision Encoder: Uses a dual vision encoder approach with DINOv2 (~300M) and SigLIP (~400M) which takes in an image and creates embeds flattened 
patches. DINOv2 excels at spatial relationships while SigLIP offers strong language alignment properties. To adapt the vision encoders to new tasks like action 
prediction it is important to unfreeze and train these model layers as well.
2.Projector: Vision embeddings are mapped into a shared embedding space of LLM using an MLP projector.
3.LLM: Llama2 7B model takes in an language instruction and is tokenized. The vision embeddings and text tokens together is passed as a sequence to LLM to 
generate actions such as changes in position, rotation and gripper state which can be directly used as continuous signals to control robots end effector.
• Franka Emika Panda 7-DoF robot arm is used as test bed operating at 5Hz for evaluation and benchmarks. The project also added support for parameter 
efficient fine-tuning techniques like LoRA and experimental results shows these PEFT models perform on par with the original model.
• Interestingly the authors suggest that we can train VLAs just like LLM , via next token prediction with cross entropy loss. All we need is only 255 action 
tokens to represent entire action space of a robot given the visual observation and language instruction.
• Experimental studies shows that OpenVLA outperforms RT-2-X(55B) despite having 7 times fewer parameters. However OpenVLA natively doesn’t perform 
well on Out of Distribution (unseen) dataset compared to RT-2 as it wasn’t trained on web data unlike RT-2. Therefore fine-tuning on unseen data 
distribution helps the model to quickly adapt to the novel episodes.

Generalist Robot Policies (GRP)
4. QUAR-VLA: Quadruped Robots from MiLAB
• QUAR-VLA, Vision Language Action Model for Quadruped Robots mainly targets four-legged robots to navigate complex 
terrains and perform various tasks. Legged robots require complex coordination of multiple joints and gait management 
which is efficiently handled using QUAR-VLA.
• QUAR-VLA is trained on dataset containing navigation, locomotion on complex terrain including both real-world and 
synthetic data.
• QUART-2 takes in a set of observation images and language instruction from user. These instructions are tokenized as 
concatenated and is passed to the pretrained VLM to generate discrete action tokens at 2Hz. The output discretizes the 
continuous action space of quadruped robots into 255 bins for effective learning and execution.

Generalist Robot Policies (GRP)
5. ALOHA from Google Deepmind
• ALOHA (A Low-cost Open-source Hardware System for Bimanual Teleoperation) is 
developed to advance the research of robotic teleoperation at an affordable cost around 
$20,000. It is basically an hardware platform for robotic manipulation tasks using an 
teleoperation (humans) and the original ALOHA doesn’t have any VLA integrated natively.
• However, the research communities used ALOHA as test bed to benchmark and evaluate 
their VLA models for bimanual manipulation tasks, especially Mobile ALOHA, OpenVLA-OFT, 
π0, RDT-1B etc.

Generalist Robot Policies (GRP)
6. π0: Physical Intelligence
• π is a foundational Vision-Language-Action Flow Model for general robot control from Physical Intelligence with two variants π0 (Pi-Zero) and π0 Fast. It comprises 
of a ~3B pretrained Paligemma VLM model as base backbone and an additional 300M diffusion model as an action expert trained on π Cross-Embodiment Robot 
dataset. VLAs has additional action and state tokens appended at the end of image and text tokens. The model is pretrained with massive, diverse dataset and
• VLM: The VLM uses SigLIP as image encoder an Gemma for language commands. The VLM doesn’t see the future robot state/actions tokens preventing the model from 
any sort of confusion to interpret visual information from its pre-trained knowledge. By adapting this VLM to also act an action expert is added which tightly works with 
VLM.
• Action Expert: The action expert attends to all the previous vision/language/robot state tokens which represents the full scene to produce context-conditioned actions. 
Instead of just one action (discrete) token, it generates continuous sequences of action tokens (H = 50) by usingconditional flow matching for smooth and realistic 
movements.
• π0-FAST an extension of π0 which works in autoregressive manner unlike π0, with Frequency-space Action Sequence Tokenization (FAST) introduces a novel time-
series compression approach using the Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT). FAST reduces redundancy, improves efficiency, and enhances action fidelity.

Generalist Robot Policies (GRP)
7. Helix by Figure AI
• Helix is a closed source generalist VLA model for Humanoid Control developed by FigureAI trained on ~500 hours of high-quality, multi-robot dataset in supervised fashion. It 
proposes a first-of-its-kind decoupled dual system architecture similar to open source Groot N1 with System-2 manages high level planning and System-1 for handling high 
frequency low level tasks.
• One neural network: Unlike prior approaches, Helix uses a single set of neural network weights to learn all behaviors; picking and placing items, using drawers and refrigerators, 
and cross-robot interaction; without any task-specific fine-tuning.
• The system comprises two main component namely, S2, a VLM backbone, and S1, a latent-conditional visuomotor transformer. S1 is fast model operating at 200Hz capable of 
quickly adapting to real-time actions of partner robot, whereas S2 is a slower thinking model that process visual cues and semantic objectuves of a scene.
• S2 is built on a 7B-parameter open-source, open-weight VLM pretrained on internet-scale data. It processes monocular robot images and robot state information (consisting of 
wrist pose and finger positions) after projecting them into vision-language embedding space. Combined with natural language commands specifying desired behaviors, S2 distills 
all semantic task-relevant information into a single continuous latent vector, passed to S1 to condition its low-level actions.
• S1, an 80M parameter cross-attention encoder-decoder transformer, handles low-level control. It relies on a fully convolutional, multi-scale vision backbone for visual processing, 
initialized from pretraining done entirely in simulation. While S1 receives the same image and state inputs as S2, it processes them at a higher frequency to enable more responsive 
closed-loop control. The latent vector from S2 is projected into S1’s token space and concatenated with visual features from S1’s vision backbone along the sequence dimension, 
providing task conditioning.

Generalist Robot Policies (GRP)
8. GR00T N1 from Nvidia
• Following the same architectural and design principles of Helix, Nvidia released GR00T N1, an open 
foundational model for generalist humanoid reasoning and control. N1 is a 2B parameter model 
(eagle2_hg_model backbone) trained on massive set of both synthetic from Omniverse and Cosmos 
along with real captured data of humanoid robot dataset. Pretrained policies can be seamlessly 
adapted to cross embodied systems.
• Observation, language instruction and robot state are encoded as tokens and is passed to System 2 
and System 1 to predict action tokens that can directly control the robots.
• System 2: VLM that interprets phsical world with vision and language instructions by reasoning over to 
plan the right actions.
• System 1: A Diffusion Transformer that follows the instructions of System 2 by denoising to produce 
meaningful smooth and precise motor actions at 120Hz.

Generalist Robot Policies (GRP)
9. Gemini Robotics
• Google Deepmind introduced Gemini Robotics which is powered by powerful Gemini 2.0 multimodal. This enables to 
perform high frequency motor control at 20Hz, dexterous tasks and perform complex daily tasks precisely.
• The family consists of two primary models:
1.Gemini Robotics-ER (Embodied Reasoning): This uses native Gemini 2.0 without fine-tuning on any robot action data. It 
purely dependent on the superior spatial-relationship and vast internet pretrained knowledge about robot concepts.
2.Gemini Robotcs: Extending Gemini Robotics-ER by fine-tuning on action data for direct robot control. Its is a single unified 
model that handles perception, reasoning and action generation without separate diffusion.

System Architecture
1. Conscious Reasoning Loop (Teacher-guided practice)
• This loop is initiated by high-level natural language command, like "pour water. From the bottle into the glass“
• This is the unskilled, slow, deliberate thought process.
2. Subconscious Rehearsal Loop (Student)
This is a new component will build. It will repeatedly simulate the task to acquire skill.
• Teacher-Guided Simulation: The GR00T diffusion policy (System 1) attempts to execute the VLM's plan within the NVIDIA Isaac Sim environment.
• Trial and Error: The robot performs the action, often failing initially. The simulation state (robot joints, object poses, camera feeds) is constantly logged.
• Data Logger: will write a script to capture the successful trials, recording a sequence of state, action, and image data. This is crucial as it creates a high-quality dataset 
of skilled demonstrations. The data must be saved in the Hugging Face LeRobot format.
• Registers it into the Skill Library and updates the Skill Index with a new embedding.
3. The Skill Complier/Transition (the automation that handles the learning process)
• Once have a large enough dataset of successful trials from the simulationb (syntheic data froim dreamgen ), will fine-tune a new, task-specific policy. The original GR00T 
fine-tuning script will take the new dataset as input and output a specialized, fast-acting policy. This is the moment the unskilled conscious plan becomes a skilled 
subconscious reflex.
4. The Skill Library (Motor Memory)
• A file directory/database that stores the fine-tuned policies. When the robot is given a command it has already learned , the VLM will recognize it as a pre-existing skill 
and, instead of going through the entire rehearsal loop, will simply call the dedicated, fast-acting policy from the library. It performs a fast semantic similarity search 
between the user's command embedding and the names/descriptions of the policies in the library. This is the skilled, subconscious action. IF a highly similar skill policy 
is found (e.g., a similarity score above a certain threshold), the VLM's "conscious" thought process is complete. It tells the system to load and execute that pre-trained, 
subconscious policy directly. ELSE, if no matching skill is found, the VLM generates a high-level plan and triggers the "Conscious Rehearsal Loop" to create the new skill.
5. Task Recognizer (the decision-making “meta-cognitive switch”) 
• A simple function that checks the Skill Library upon a new command
• Checks whether an incoming command matches a known skill.
• If found → bypass planning, load the fast skill policy (subconscious reflex).
• If not found → enter Conscious Rehearsal to acquire the skill.
• Backed by a small Skill Index (vector DB of text embeddings of skill names + short descriptions + affordance tags).
The Inputs to the Robot
the robot's input is multi-modal:
• Vision: RGB-D camera images (what the robot sees).
• Proprioception: Its own joint angles, positions, and velocities 
(where its body is).
• Speech/Text: The natural language command from the user (e.g., 
"wave hello").
The Closed Feedback Loop & Safety
• This is how the robot stays aware and adaptive:
1. During Execution (Monitor): A separate, high-priority "Observer 
Module" constantly watches the world state and the robot's own 
sensors.
• Is the task succeeding? (e.g., is the object being picked up?)
• Is something wrong? (e.g., did an obstacle appear? Did a human say "STOP!"?)
2. Interruption: If the Observer detects a problem, it sends an interrupt 
signal directly to the policy, forcing it to stop and revert to a safe state.
3. Feedback to Consciousness: The outcome of the action (success or 
failure) is fed back to the Conscious System. This is how the robot knows 
that its attempt at a new task failed and needs to trigger the Skill 
Compiler.

No Title Yet!
06 Oct 2025
From Unskilled to Skilled Level by
Implementing a system inspired by the human brain's 
conscious and subconscious minds
How can a humanoid have both of systems (conscious & sub conscious) at the same time? 
How can it plan a long-term goal while reacting to split-second changes in its 
environment?
Conscious-to-subconscious skill transfer with a hierarchical, multi-
system control architecture inspired by the human brain
A. MacLean's Triune Model (The Architecture): they all memory types work together is met 
by making the Semantic and Episodic memories actively condition and monitor the Procedural 
execution.
MacLean's Layer 
(Human Brain)
Robotics Component 
(The Analogy)
Memory Type (The 
State) Control Speed
Neomammalian Brain 
(Neocortex)
Conscious Layer 
(VLM/Knowledge Graph)
Semantic (General facts, 
world knowledge, object 
properties )
Slow/High-Level
Paleomammalian Brain 
(Limbic System)
Intermediate Layer (LLM 
Memory/Retrieval/vector 
Database)
Episodic (Personal 
history, specific past 
events, contextual when 
and where information. )
Medium/Planning
Protoreptilian Brain 
(Cerebellum
-Basal Ganglia/Brain 
Stem)
Subconscious Layer (Fast 
NN Policy)
Procedural (Automated 
skills, motor habits, 
"know-how. ")
Fast/Low-Level
Inspired by MacLean's Triune Brain Theory
• Neomammalian Brain --> Semantic Memory (VLM/LLM - 
conscious reasoning)
• Paleomammalian Brain --> Episodic Memory (experience storage)
• Protoreptilian Brain --> Procedural Memory (fast motor control)
* All the memory system must work together simultaneously. 
Even during subconscious execution, conscious layer monitors
Conscious-to-subconscious skill transfer with a hierarchical, multi-
system control architecture inspired by the human brain
B. Fitts and Posner Model (The Skill Transfer Process)
1. Cognitive Stage (Unskilled → Conscious): The robot is in a high-attention, slow-feedback loop.
• Robot Behavior: The Conscious Layer (VLM/LLM) heavily dominates, translating high-level 
instructions (text/vision) into low-level action steps. Performance is slow, erratic, and requires 
significant VLM computational cycles, mirroring the human beginner's reliance on self-talk and explicit 
verbal instructions. This is initial state.
2. Associative Stage (Refinement → Practice): The VLM's successful execution traces are used to train a 
dedicated, lightweight NN policy (Policy Distillation).
• Robot Behavior: The NN policy begins to take over action generation, becoming the Subconscious 
Layer. Performance improves, errors decrease, and the need for VLM intervention is reduced, though 
still required for novel situations or complex sub-tasks.
3. Autonomous Stage (Skilled → Subconscious): The skill is fully internalized.
• Robot Behavior: The Subconscious Layer executes the task at high speed with little to no VLM 
intervention. The VLM now operates in a low-frequency monitoring mode (error checking, dual-
tasking) only intervening if a large sensory prediction error occurs, effectively freeing up the "conscious" 
resources for other tasks (like thinking about dinner). This is final goal state.
Conscious-to-subconscious skill transfer with a hierarchical, multi-
system control architecture inspired by the human brain
C. The Cerebellum (The Mechanism for Speed and Automation)
The Cerebellum's role is critical for the speed, precision, and automation (the 
"fast, skilled" part of the goal).
• Role in Humans: The cerebellum acts as an internal forward model that 
predicts the sensory consequences of motor commands, allowing for real-
time error correction and anticipatory control. It is central to the automation 
of motor skills (procedural learning) and even non-motor cognitive tasks. 
Damage to the cerebellum necessitates increased attention from higher-level 
executive areas, supporting the link between cerebellum function and 
reduced conscious effort.
RQs
• How can humanoids have both conscious & subconscious systems 
simultaneously.
• How to transform unskilled task execution to skilled task 
execution?
• How to enable robots to plan long-term goals while reacting to 
split-second changes?
• How to implement hierarchical system with lower-level (fast 
responding feedback loop), higher-level (slow deliberate control), 
all memory layers active and updated together.
Main Goals
1. Develop a Hierarchical Hybrid Control System for Skill Transfer:
• Engineer a high-level (slow/VLM/Conscious) to low-level (fast/NN/Subconscious) hierarchical architecture that 
explicitly incorporates a Mid-Level Skill Refiner (Paleomammalian/Cerebellum analog). Demonstrate smooth 
transition from deliberate, unskilled actions to fast, skilled behaviors on the Humanoid H1 platform, while 
retaining continuous high-level monitoring.
• The refiner must mediate the smooth, quantitative transition of a task from high-level, deliberate planning (VLM 
instructions) into fast, efficient, low-level execution (refined NN policy), thus demonstrating the "Conscious-to-
Subconscious" skill transfer.
2. Integrate MacLean’s 3-in-1Hypotheses with a Continuous, Co-operating Memory 
System:
• Implement a unified memory system where Semantic (neocortex, rational cognition and language, VLM knowledge, 
reasoning, provides symbolic scene understanding and high-level planning., facts), Episodic (limbic system, RAG 
error/success logs, stores, retrieves and reasons over experience to aid planning and learning), and Procedural 
(basal ganalia, learn and excutes motor skills more efficiently over time , NN weights/Skill Refiner parameters) layers 
are continuously active, updated, and cross-aware, not just sequential.
• Demonstrate that the procedural skill refinement is informed by semantic high-level goals and episodic task-
specific failures/successes, leading to a more robust and faster skill acquisition than standard imitation learning or 
policy distillation methods.

No Title Yet!
14 Oct 2025
From Unskilled to Skilled Level by
Implementing a system inspired by the human brain's 
conscious and subconscious minds
How can a humanoid have both of systems (conscious & sub conscious) at the same time? 
How can it plan a long-term goal while reacting to split-second changes in its 
environment?
System Architecture: A Unified Hierarchical 
Model
• It is a unified hierarchical control system with three levels of memory, fulfilling Goal 1 
(Hierarchical Control) and Goal 2 (All Memory Together).
• Memory 
  Component Mapping
Memory Type Hierarchical Layer 
(Control Rate) Component Goal
Semantic (General 
Knowledge/Facts, Logic, 
Reasoning, Planning, Concepts, 
Meaning of words)
High/Slow-Level Control (~ 1Hz)
VLM (System 2) + Constrained CoT 
Prompting = make it thinking out 
load
Constrained CoT Prompting 
(handles all aspects of Semantic 
(Declarative) Memory; both the 
Knowledge (what is) and the 
Reasoning/Planning (how to do it 
safely)) for explicit, visible 
reasoning; RAG interface to DB . 
Episodic (Specific Events (where, 
when, emotions), Personal 
Experience, Context) 
Mid/Learning-Level (Offline) Vector Database + VLM Encoder, 
Policy Distillation Module
Stores in  D Band retrieves past 
successful/failed conscious 
traces. Algorithm to distill 
successful VLM-guided 
trajectories into efficient NN_P.
Procedural (Learned Skill/ Tasks, 
Habits) Low/Fast-Level Control (~120 Hz) Diffusion Transformer (System 1)
Fast, high-frequency motion 
generation and execution. Fine-
tuned NN_P for fast, learned, 
stable Whole-Body Control.
MacLean Integration
• Semantic/Neocortex: Perception, reasoning, and plan as 
symbolic knowledge
• Episodic/Limbic: All experiences, outcomes, and critiques saved 
and searchable—system "remembers" failures and can adjust 
next plans accordingly
• Procedural/Basal Ganglia: Will use successful 
e_subgoals/episodes for fast, direct control later

No Title Yet!
14 Oct 2025
From Unskilled to Skilled Level by
Implementing a system inspired by the human brain's 
conscious and subconscious minds
How can a humanoid have both of systems (conscious & sub conscious) at the same time? 
How can it plan a long-term goal while reacting to split-second changes in its 
environment?
Progress Update
Doing: 
• Implementing the Semantic Layer
Semantic Layer Implementation (VLM: rational part)
Goal: 
• It is the robot’s understanding system, it gives 
meaning to what it sees & hears ( 1) Scene 
Understanding, 2) Reasoning & Foresight, & 3) Task 
Planning).
1) Converts raw sensory data (RGB-D, Text)  into a 
structured, symbolic representation (objects, 
relations, affordances).
2) Uses these symbols to perform logical, language-
like reasoning about subgoals, constraints, and 
safety. 
3) Generates actionable plans in a structured format 
that lower-level systems can execute (JSON 
subgoals[]).
• Procedural uses subgoals + e_subgoal for execution; 
Episodic logs full PlanPacket for recall & novelty 
tracking.
Inputs: Vision (RGB-D), 
Language 
(Text/Speech→Text), &  
Robot State (Pose, Joint 
Angles).
• Nodes: object ID, class, pose_SE3, size, 
affordances[], attributes (color, material)
• Edges: (on, in, near, left_of, reachable, 
supports)
• Metadata: confidence, scene_id, 
timestamp
e_subgoal = f_VLM(plan_text, image_tokens)
numeric embedding
symbolic plan (JSON)
Unified Output (PlanPacket):
{ subgoals[], constraints[], e_subgoal[], rationale, timestamp }

No Title Yet!
21 Oct 2025
Cancelled
From Unskilled to Skilled Level by
Implementing a system inspired by the human brain's 
conscious and subconscious minds
How can a humanoid have both of systems (conscious & sub conscious) at the same time? 
How can it plan a long-term goal while reacting to split-second changes in its 
environment?

No Title Yet!
28 Oct 2025
From Unskilled to Skilled Level by
Implementing a system inspired by the human brain's 
conscious and subconscious minds
How can a humanoid have both of systems (conscious & sub conscious) at the same time? 
How can it plan a long-term goal while reacting to split-second changes in its 
environment?
Progress Update
Done: 
• Implementing the Semantic Layer
Doing: (EOW)
• Implementing the Episodic Layer  
Semantic Layer Implementation (VLM: rational part)
The layer do: 
• Extracts knowledge, facts, relationships, and high-level plans (as symbols and constraints) from images and 
language.
• Performs explicit reasoning (planning, constraint satisfaction, verification, self-correction).
• Represents all thoughts as JSON/text for transparency, debugging, and logging.
• Never tries impossible actions (doesn't hallucinate non-existent objects; logs failures).
• Is designed for logs to be used in episodic memory.
Subgoal Encoder: “translating” symbols to 
continuous control
• This action converts the slow, symbolic JSON into the fast, 
continuous vector that conditions the low-level policy (DiT/System 
1).
Task File/Component Detail
Implement Encoder subgoal_encoder.py
Implement the full 
$\mathbf{e}_{\text{subgoal}}$ 
generation: One-Hot Action 
$\oplus$ Geometric Features 
$\oplus$ Semantic 
Hashing/Projection.
Integrate Dispatch vlm_semantic_tools.py
In the main execution loop (after if 
final_plan:), import encode_subgoal 
and use the first valid subgoal 
(final_plan['subgoals'][0]) to 
generate the 
$\mathbf{e}_{\text{subgoal}}$ 
vector.
Verification
Print the vector's shape ([256]) and 
confirm the values are non-zero and 
L2-normalized.
Subgoal Encoder
Design:
• Takes a verified subgoal (JSON) and produces a fixed-size, L2-
normalized 256-D vector.
Vector is a concatenation of:
• One-hot action (grasp, fold, place, etc.)
• Normalized geometric features (e.g., centroid, size if available)
• Semantic hashes of labels, goal keywords, etc.
• Optionally, hazard bits.
Episodic Layer Implementation
• Actions, conditions, experiences saved to be used in episodic 
memory
Episodic memory should log the entire tuple:
• Scene image/graph (what did I see?)
• Plan (what steps did I think would achieve the goal?)
• Goal (what was I trying to do?)
• Verification/critiques (what failed or succeeded, why?)
• Outcome (did it succeed? What was the result?)
• Optionally, raw sensory and low-level action traces (still not yet)
Episodic Memory Integration 
(Paleomammalian)
• The Paleomammalian Brain is responsible for adaptive behavior 
through experience (emotion/error feedback). This maps directly 
to using Episodic Memory (logs of past failures/successes) to 
refine the conscious plan.
Task Component Detail & MacLean's Link
Set up Database FAISS / ChromaDB (Vector Store)
Choose a local vector database 
library. Create a database 
structure to store the "Plan 
Packets" (your 
semantic_log_*.json contents: 
Goal, Scene, Plan, Outcome).
Add Outcome Metric Execution Log
Modify the main loop to simulate 
the outcome. For now, assume a 
simulated metric: outcome = 
"SUCCESS" if plan is valid, outcome 
= "FAILURE" if planning retries fail.
RAG Integration Episodic Feedback Loop
Implement a function: 
query_episodic_memory(goal, 
failure_critique). This function 
uses RAG (Vector Search) to 
retrieve the CoT Reasoning from a 
past, similar failure and returns it 
as a retrieved text snippet.
Plug the output of 
query_episodic_memory into the 
VLM prompt's critique argument 
in plan_task. This gives the 
Neomammalian layer context of its 
past failures ("I remember trying 
to grasp the cloth like that, and I 
failed because...") before it 
generates the new plan.
Episodic Memory- Database & Retrieval
• A. Set up vector database:
For quick prototype, use FAISS or ChromaDB.
Store:
• Goal (text)
• Scene (graph or vectorized)
• Plan (JSON)
• Critiques, attempts, outcomes
• e_subgoal vector
• (optionally) raw image, sensory/action traces
Episodic Memory- Database & Retrieval
• B. Log every episode (success and failure):
• After every plan attempt, save to episodic DB/log:
episode_record = {
    "timestamp": datetime.now().isoformat(),
    "goal": goal,
    "scene": scene_data,
    "plan": plan_result,
    "critique": critique,
    "outcome": "SUCCESS" if plan_found else "FAILURE" ,
    "e_subgoal": esubgoal.tolist() if plan_found else None,
}
# Save as JSON
with open(os.path.join(log_dir, f"episodic_{attempt}.json"), "w") as f:
    json.dump(episode_record, f, indent=2)
Episodic Memory- Database & Retrieval
• C. Query Episodic Memory for RAG Feedback:
• build a simple vector search using FAISS/ChromaDB by 
embedding the goal/critique text (using, e.g., 
SentenceTransformers or OpenAI embeddings).
Then in main planning loop:
• If a plan fails, call query_episodic_memory(goal, critique, 
episodic_db)
• Add the retrieved experience into the VLM's prompt as extra 
context for replanning

No Title Yet!
04 Nov 2025
From Unskilled to Skilled Level by
Implementing a system inspired by the human brain's 
conscious and subconscious minds
How can a humanoid have both of systems (conscious & sub conscious) at the same time? 
How can it plan a long-term goal while reacting to split-second changes in its 
environment?
Progress Update
Done: 
• Implementing the Procedural Layer
Doing: (EOW)
• Integrating it with the rest if the layers


No Title Yet!
11 Nov 2025
From Unskilled to Skilled Level by
Implementing a system inspired by the human brain's 
conscious and subconscious minds
How can a humanoid have both of systems (conscious & sub conscious) at the same time? 
How can it plan a long-term goal while reacting to split-second changes in its 
environment?
Progress Update
Done: 
• Implemented Semantic Layer (LLaVA 1.5 → Scene Graph → Plan JSON)
• Built Episodic Memory (FAISS vector DB + episode logger)
• Integrated Procedural Diffusion Policy module (action  vector -> task execution)
• Validated data flow Semantic → Episodic → Procedural in terminal tests
Doing: 
• Integrating Layers in Custom MuJoCo Env
• Testing the Full Architecture in Sim
Semantic Layer (Reasoning, Scene Understanding, Symbolic 
Planning)
Model: llava-hf/llava-1.5-7b-hf 
Inputs: RGB-D image + task text
Outputs: Scene graph, reasoning trace, symbolic plan, subgoal 
embeddings.
Pipeline Logic (perception → understanding → reasoning → goal decomposition → plan)
1. Perception: capture RGB-D frame → object & affordance detection.
2. Scene Graph Construction: extract objects, relations, constraints → 
scene_graph.json.
3. Reasoning & Planning: language reasoning over scene + goal text to generate 
subgoals → plan.json.
4. Embedding Generation: encode each subgoal into 256-D numeric vector 
(e_subgoal) for downstream episodic/procedural learning.
Semantic Layer Implementation (VLM: rational part)
Goal: 
• It is the robot’s understanding system, it gives 
meaning to what it sees & hears ( 1) Scene 
Understanding, 2) Reasoning & Foresight, & 3) Task 
Planning).
1) Converts raw sensory data (RGB-D, Text)  into a 
structured, symbolic representation (objects, 
relations, affordances).
2) Uses these symbols to perform logical, language-
like reasoning about subgoals, constraints, and 
safety. 
3) Generates actionable plans in a structured format 
that lower-level systems can execute (JSON 
subgoals[]).
• Procedural uses subgoals + e_subgoal for execution; 
Episodic logs full PlanPacket for recall & novelty 
tracking.
Inputs: Vision (RGB-D), 
Language 
(Text/Speech→Text), &  
Robot State (Pose, Joint 
Angles).
• Nodes: object ID, class, pose_SE3, size, 
affordances[], attributes (color, material)
• Edges: (on, in, near, left_of, reachable, 
supports)
• Metadata: confidence, scene_id, 
timestamp
e_subgoal = f_VLM(plan_text, image_tokens)
numeric embedding
symbolic plan (JSON)
Unified Output (PlanPacket):
{ subgoals[], constraints[], e_subgoal[], rationale, timestamp }
Semantic Layer (Reasoning, Scene Understanding, Symbolic 
Planning)
Inputs
• Goal text: “Fold the sweater neatly on the table. ”
• Real robot view (Image):

Semantic Layer (Reasoning, Scene Understanding, Symbolic 
Planning)
Outputs (automatically generated)
• Scene Graph (scene_graph.json)

Semantic Layer (Reasoning, Scene Understanding, Symbolic 
Planning)
Outputs (automatically generated)
• Reasoning Chain (reasoning_trace.json)

Semantic Layer (Reasoning, Scene Understanding, Symbolic 
Planning)
Outputs (automatically generated)
• Plan (plan.json)

Episodic Layer (Experience Memory & Retrieval)
Model: all-MiniLM-L6-v2 (Sentence-BERT) for semantic embedding.
Pipeline Logic:
1. Encode → Convert semantic plan + scene graph into numerical embeddings (256-
D per subgoal) (episodic_*.json)
2. Store → Append a structured episode record → {goal, scene, plan, 
outcome, embeddings} to the episodic memory database. 
(./logs/episodic_memory)
3. Retrieve → Query FAISS vector index using the current goal embedding. In-memory 
top-k similar episodes ranked by score. 
4. Replay → Return the most similar successful episode (similarity ≥ 0.9 → activates 
the subconscious pathway and provides prior plan + action traces to the 
Procedural layer.
Procedural Layer (Skill Execution)
Model: Fine-tuned Diffusion Policy (skill-specific transformer for low-latency 
actions).
Input: Subgoal embedding (256-D) + current robot state.
Output: Continuous action tensor → joint velocities / positions (16 × 32 per 
episode).
Loop rate: ≈ 50 Hz (reactive control).
Pipeline Logic:
1. Receive verified subgoal from Episodic layer.
2. Map embedding → motor action sequence via Diffusion Policy.
3. Execute and monitor.
4. Log trajectory & success → feedback to Episodic memory.
Integration Test (All Layers Together)
• Case 1: New / Unseen Task
• Case 2 : Familiar / Known Task
• Case 3 : Goal Not Match Scene / Missing Objects

NEXT: MuJoCo Environment Setup
• Custom scene loaded with camera stream.

No Title Yet!
11 Nov 2025
From Unskilled to Skilled Level by
Implementing a system inspired by the human brain's 
conscious and subconscious minds
How can a humanoid have both of systems (conscious & sub conscious) at the same time? 
How can it plan a long-term goal while reacting to split-second changes in its 
environment?


Transform Robot Actions from 
Conscious to Subconscious
Initial Title 
09 Sep 2025
Research Questions
1. How can a humanoid robot combine slow, high-level reasoning 
with fast, low-level motor control in a single system?
2. How can deliberate actions be transformed into fast, automatic 
skills?
3. How can semantic, episodic, and procedural memory operate 
together continuously, not sequentially?
Full System Overview

Semantic Reasoning Layer

Episodic Memory Layer

Procedural (G1 Whole-Body Loco-manipulation 
Policy) Layer 

Progress Update
Done: 
• Semantic reasoning layer built from scratch using Qwen2-VL
(vision → reasoning → subgoals → embeddings)
• Episodic memory implemented with:
    - experience logging (RGB, subgoals, outcomes)
    - novelty detection and recall
• Unitree G1 whole-body loco-manipulation policy:
    - trained, fine-tuned, and integrated as a procedural executor
• End-to-end closed-loop execution working in simulation
(semantic monitoring + procedural execution)
Progress Update
Doing (In progress): 
• Quantitative evaluation:
    - success rate
    - execution time
    - motion smoothness (jerk)
• Ablation studies:
    - without episodic memory
    - without semantic monitoring
• Clean write-up
Results
Failure Modes of Pure Procedural Execution
• Robot attempts grasp
• Grasp is weak / failed → apple slips
• Procedural policy continues executing the remaining subgoals
    - walks left
    - reaches toward plate
• Robot does not stop, because:
    - no success monitoring at the procedural level
    - no semantic interruption
• Result: robot places nothing near the plate
Instruction: pick up the apple, walk left and place 
the apple on the plate. (robocasa_env.py:232)

Results
Successful Modes of Hierarchical Control
• Robot ties to grasp
• Semantic monitor checks:
     - “Is apple in gripper?”
     - via vision / state
• If false → interrupt
• After release, semantic layer checks:
    - “Is apple inside plate region?”
• If only touching edge:
    - adject or nudge apple
Instruction: pick up the apple, walk left and place 
the apple on the plate. (robocasa_env.py:232)

Instruction: pick up the apple, walk left and place 
the apple on the plate. (robocasa_env.py:232)

Instruction: pick up the apple, walk left and place 
the apple on the plate. (robocasa_env.py:232)

Instruction: pick up the apple, walk left and place 
the apple on the plate. (robocasa_env.py:232)

RandRobotPose: a robustness variant of a real task. Test 
task completeness starting from different 
positions/orientations.
VisualReach: purely a visual debug/placeholder 
env (no real task).
